update: updated tutorial on Kotlin/Native in using-intellij-idea.md (#1848)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: pages/docs/tutorials/native/using-intellij-idea.md

The `build.gradle.kts` file contains the project settings. You can change the settings using [Kotlin Multiplatform Gradle DSL reference](../../reference/mpp-dsl-reference.html).

## Run the application

Start the application by clicking **Run** next to the run configuration at the top of the screen.

![Run the application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-3.png') }})

IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output:
![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-4.png') }})

## Update the application

### Count letters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

   The `src` directory contains Kotlin source files and resources. The file `main.kt` includes sample code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" using the [`prinln()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/println.html) function.

2. Change the code of `main()`:

   * Use the [`readLine()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function to read the input value to the `name` variable.

>    * Check the input value with the [safe call operator `?.`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html#safe-calls).

Reviewer: May be say about that this is null check? Something like "Make null check of the input value"?

Author: I changed the sentence.

   * Use the [`replace()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/replace.html) function to eliminate the whitespaces in the name.
   * Use the scope function [`let`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/scope-functions.html#let) to execute function within the object context. 

>    * Use a [string template](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/basic-types.html#string-templates) to insert your name into the string by adding a dollar sign `$` and enclosing it in curly braces – `${name?.length}`.

Reviewer: `${name?.length}` seems to stay from previous version.

Author: oopsie, fixed that

>    * Use a [string template](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/basic-types.html#string-templates) to insert your name into the string by adding a dollar sign `$` and enclosing it in curly braces – `${it?.length}`.

Reviewer: Again extra `?`. Variable is already not nullable. May be it's worth to mention that it is default name of lambda parameter. It may be unclear for beginners.

Author: Fixed

   ![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-5.png') }})

### Count unique letters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

2. Count the distinct letters in your name:

   * Convert the name to lower case using the [`toLowerCase()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/to-lower-case.html) function.
   * Convert the input string to a collection of characters using the [`toList()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/to-list.html) function.
   * Select only distinct characters in your name using the [`distinct()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/distinct.html) function.
   * Count distinct characters using the [`count()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/count.html) function.

   <div class="sample" markdown="1" theme="idea" mode="kotlin" data-highlight-only>

   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
       println("Hello, enter your name:")
       val name = readLine()
       name?.replace(" ", "")?.let {
           println("Your name contains ${it.length} letters")

>            println("Your name contains ${it.toLowerCase().toList().distinct().count()} unique letters")

Reviewer: Looks a bit long for such small example. May be it would be better to do extension function
```
fun String.countDistinctCharacters() = toLowerCase().toList().distinct().count()
fun main() {
...
println("Your name contains ${it.countDistinctCharacters()} unique letters")
}
```

Or extension property

```
val String.distinctCharactersNumber:Int
    get() = toLowerCase().toList().distinct().count()
```

Author: It makes the sample looking too complex, doesn't it? I'd leave the current version instead if you don't mind.

Reviewer: The main problem is that the second print is too long. If I open staging link, this string even doesn't fit a code block width.
Again I amn't aware of the purpose of this tutorial. If we want to show syntax sugar of Kotlin to write readable code extension function is better. If this tutorial is for people without any background at least we can make a variable `val distinctCharacters = it.toLowerCase().toList().distinct().count()`. It would be more readable on web page.

Author: Ok, I got it.
I took an example with an extension function – I guess it looks more clear because we use only functions in that sample.

To get started, install the latest version of [IntelliJ IDEA](http://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/index.html). The tutorial is applicable to both IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition and the Ultimate Edition.

## Create a new Kotlin/Native project in IntelliJ IDEA

1. In IntelliJ IDEA, select **File** \| **New** \| **Project**.
2. In the panel on the left, select **Kotlin**.
3. Enter a project name, select **Native Application** as the project template, and click **Next**.

   ![Create a native application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-1.png') }})

   By default, your project will use Gradle with Kotlin DSL as the build system.
   > Kotlin/Native doesn't support Maven and IntelliJ build systems.
   {:.note}

4. Accept the default configuration on the next screen and click **Finish**.

   ![Configure a native application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-2.png') }})

Your project opens. By default, the wizard creates the necessary `main.kt` file with the code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" to the standard output.

> The `build.gradle.kts` file contains the project settings. You can change the settings using [Kotlin Multiplatform Gradle DSL reference](../../reference/mpp-dsl-reference.html).

Reviewer 2: What settings do you recommend changing in this tutorial? DSL Reference is too long and pretty complicated to get started.

Author: I changed the sentence to "Read more about the settings...".

## Run the application

Start the application by clicking **Run** next to the run configuration at the top of the screen.

![Run the application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-3.png') }})

IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output:
![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-4.png') }})

## Update the application

### Count letters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

   The `src` directory contains Kotlin source files and resources. The file `main.kt` includes sample code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" using the [`prinln()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/println.html) function.

> 2. Change the code of `main()`:

Reviewer 2: IMO The list is long to correlate with the code. Maybe do the same thing in a few steps to make it easier to follow and understand. or at least insert a piece of code after each logical explanation of a substep.

Author: I divided it into three blocks. 
It became more readable.

   * Use the [`readLine()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function to read the input value to the `name` variable.
   * Perform the null check of the input value with the [safe call operator `?.`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html#safe-calls).
   * Use the [`replace()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/replace.html) function to eliminate the whitespaces in the name.
   * Use the scope function [`let`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/scope-functions.html#let) to execute function within the object context. 

>    * Use a [string template](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/basic-types.html#string-templates) to insert your name into the string by adding a dollar sign `$` and enclosing it in curly braces – `${it.length}`.

Reviewer: `to insert your name` -> `to insert your name length`?

   * Use the `countDistinctCharacters()` function to count unique letters in your name.

   <div class="sample" markdown="1" theme="idea" mode="kotlin" data-highlight-only>

   ```kotlin
   fun String.countDistinctCharacters() = toLowerCase().toList().distinct().count()

   fun main() {
       println("Hello, enter your name:")
       val name = readLine()
       name?.replace(" ", "")?.let {
           println("Your name contains ${it.length} letters")
           println("Your name contains ${it.countDistinctCharacters()} unique letters")
       } ?: error("Error while reading input from the terminal: the value can't be null.")
   }
   ```

   </div>

3. Save the changes and run the application.

   IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output.

4. Enter your name and enjoy the result:

   ![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-6.png') }})

## What's next?

The sample project can serve as the basis for any new project for Kotlin/Native. For further information, check out:

> * [Kotlin/Native Gradle plugin](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/native/gradle_plugin.html)

Reviewer 2: This is an old page. There is no Kotlin/Native Gradle plugin since Kotlin 1.3.40. We discussed with Native guys and they should remove this page.

Author: Changed the whole section.

> * [Multiplatform Projects](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/mpp-discover-project.html)

Reviewer 2: Why do you add a link here?
What would you recommend after competing this tutorial? Create a multiplatform project? Then you should add a link for creating. 
Maybe some Kotlin/Native docs could be helpful to dig deeper.

Author: Changed the whole section (now it's about hands-ons)

date: 2020-08-20
showAuthorInfo: false
---

<!--- To become a How-To. Need to change type to new "HowTo" --->

To get started, install the latest version of [IntelliJ IDEA](http://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/index.html). The tutorial is applicable to both IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition and the Ultimate Edition.

## Create a new Kotlin/Native project in IntelliJ IDEA

1. In IntelliJ IDEA, select **File** \| **New** \| **Project**.
2. In the panel on the left, select **Kotlin**.
3. Enter a project name, select **Native Application** as the project template, and click **Next**.

   ![Create a native application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-1.png') }})

   By default, your project will use Gradle as the build system.

4. Accept the default configuration on the next screen and click **Finish**.

   ![Configure a native application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-2.png') }})

Your project opens. By default, the wizard creates the necessary `main.kt` file with the code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" to the standard output.

> The `build.gradle.kts` file contains information about target platforms (Windows, Linux, macOS).

Reviewer: May be there should be information about possible customizations?
Something "you can change settings of project describing with Kotlin multiplatform gradle plugin DSL (link to page with details of MPP plugin)?

![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-4.png') }})

## Update the application

### Count characters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

   The `src` directory contains Kotlin source files and resources. The file `main.kt` includes sample code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" using the [prinln](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/println.html) function.

2. Change the code of `main()`:

   * Use the [readLine](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function to read the input value to the `name` variable.
   * Check the input value with the [safe call operator](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html#safe-calls) `?.`. 
   * Use a [string template](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/basic-types.html#string-templates) to insert your name into the string by adding a dollar sign `$` and enclosing it in curly braces – `${name?.length}`. 

   <div class="sample" markdown="1" theme="idea" mode="kotlin" data-highlight-only>
   
   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
       println("Hello, enter your name:")
   

>        var name = readLine()

Reviewer: `val name`

>        println("Your name contains ${name?.length} letters")

Reviewer: I think it's a bit strange in case of null. `null letters`? May be provide readable error with `error()` function?

   }
   ```
   
   </div>

3. Save the changes and run the application.

   IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output.

4. Enter your name and enjoy the result:

   ![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-5.png') }})

### Eliminate the whitespaces

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

2. Add a whitespaces check:

   * Use the [contains](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/contains.html) function to check is there whitespaces in the input name .
   * Use the [replace](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/replace.html) function to eliminate the whitespaces in the name.

>    * Change read-only variable `var name` to `val name` since you assign a new name value without whitespaces.

Reviewer: There is a mistake `val` - read-only, in `var` you can write.

   <div class="sample" markdown="1" theme="idea" mode="kotlin" data-highlight-only>
   
   ```kotlin

>    val name = readLine()

Reviewer: `var name`

>    println("Your name contains ${name?.length} letters")

Reviewer: If you decide to use previous advice with null-check. Then here you can show that after null check no need to use operators `?.`
```
name?.let {
   println("Your name contains ${name.length} letters")
   if (name.contains(" ")) {
       name = name.replace(" ", "")
   }
   
   println("Your name without whitespaces: $name")
}
```

Reviewer: At the same time I don't see any need to write such code. I'd rather write
`println("Your name without whitespaces: ${name.replace(" ", "")}")` without any conditions and changing variables.

Your project opens. By default, the wizard creates the necessary `main.kt` file with the code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" to the standard output.

The `build.gradle.kts` file contains the project settings. Read more about the settings in the [Kotlin Multiplatform Gradle DSL reference](/docs/reference/mpp-dsl-reference.html).

## Run the application

Start the application by clicking **Run** next to the run configuration at the top of the screen.

![Run the application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-run-app.png') }})

IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output:
![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-output-1.png') }})

## Update the application

### Count letters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

   The `src` directory contains Kotlin source files and resources. The file `main.kt` includes sample code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" using the [`println()`](/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/stdlib/kotlin.io/println.html) function.

> 2. Add the code to read the input. Use the [`readLine()`](/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function to read the input value and write it to the `name` variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Add the code to read the input. Use the [`readLine()`](/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function to read the input value and assign it to the `name` variable.
```

   > Kotlin/Native doesn't support Maven and IntelliJ build systems.
   {:.note}

4. Accept the default configuration on the next screen and click **Finish**.

   ![Configure a native application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-new-project-intellij-2.png') }})

Your project opens. By default, the wizard creates the necessary `main.kt` file with the code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" to the standard output.

The `build.gradle.kts` file contains the project settings. Read more about the settings in the [Kotlin Multiplatform Gradle DSL reference](../../reference/mpp-dsl-reference.html).

## Run the application

Start the application by clicking **Run** next to the run configuration at the top of the screen.

![Run the application]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-run-app.png') }})

IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output:
![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-output-1.png') }})

## Update the application

### Count letters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

>    The `src` directory contains Kotlin source files and resources. The file `main.kt` includes sample code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" using the [`prinln()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/println.html) function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The `src` directory contains Kotlin source files and resources. The file `main.kt` includes sample code that prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!" using the [`println()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/println.html) function.
```

Reviewer 3: Also please use relative links to the API reference pages.
(/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/.../...html)

Author: Fixed all links.

2. Add the code to read the input. Use the [`readLine()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function to read the input value and write it to the `name` variable.

   <div class="sample" markdown="1" theme="idea" mode="kotlin" data-highlight-only>

   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
       // Read the input value.
       println("Hello, enter your name:")
       val name = readLine()
   }
   ```

   </div>

> 3. Eliminate the white spaces and count the letters:

Reviewer 3: Are you sure about the `white space` spelling when referring to a character? To me `whitespace` seems more natural: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitespace_character

Author: Fixed.

>    * Perform the null check of the input value with the [safe call operator `?.`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html#safe-calls).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * Check that the provided name is not `null` with the [safe call operator `?.`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html#safe-calls).
```

Seems a bit too formal.

   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
       // Read the input value.
       println("Hello, enter your name:")
       val name = readLine()
       // Count letters in the name.
       name?.replace(" ", "")?.let {
           println("Your name contains ${it.length} letters")
       }
   }
   ```

   </div>

4. Report about the null value using the [`error()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/error.html) function after the [Elvis operator `?:`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html#elvis-operator).

   <div class="sample" markdown="1" theme="idea" mode="kotlin" data-highlight-only>

   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
       // Read the input value.
       println("Hello, enter your name:")
       val name = readLine()
       // Count letters in the name.
       name?.replace(" ", "")?.let {
           println("Your name contains ${it.length} letters")
       } ?: error("Error while reading input from the terminal: the value can't be null.")
   }
   ```

   </div>

5. Save the changes and run the application.

   IntelliJ IDEA opens the **Run** tab and shows the output.

6. Enter your name and enjoy the result:

>    ![Application output]({{ url_for('tutorial_img', filename='native/using-intellij-idea/native-output-2.png') }})

Reviewer 3: This may be a personal preference, but I think that using neutral example names is better than your real name. [Google agrees](https://developers.google.com/style/examples#names)

Author: Fixed. 
We should think about a common placeholder name for such cases.

### Count unique letters in your name

1. Open the file `main.kt` in `src/<your_app_name>Main/kotlin`.

2. Declare the new [extension function](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/extensions.html#extension-functions) `countDistinctCharacters()` for `String`:

   * Convert the name to lower case using the [`toLowerCase()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/to-lower-case.html) function.

>    * Convert the input string to a collection of characters using the [`toList()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/to-list.html) function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * Convert the input string to a list of characters using the [`toList()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/to-list.html) function.
```

To be more precise.
